Add public-images article on qemu/qcow (#261)
canonical/ubuntu-cloud-docs: public-images/public-images-how-to/launch-qcow-with-qemu.rst

.. _qcow-qemu:

Launch QCOW Images Using QEMU
=============================

Ubuntu cloud images are released in many formats to enable many launch configurations and methods.

Among the many formats for cloud images is the ``.img`` QCOW format. This article will cover the QCOW use case and provide
instructions on how to use the images with QEMU.

QEMU and QCOWs
--------------

`QEMU`_ is a system emulator and "type 2" virtual machine hypervisor. Type 2 hypervisors run on top of the host operating
system. Often, QEMU is used with `KVM`_, which is a Type 1 hypervisor, which can run directly on bare metal. Together,
QEMU and KVM can enable running virtual machines at near-native speeds.

QCOW, which stands for "QEMU Copy On Write," is a format for images used by QEMU. QCOW image files grow according to use,
as opposed to pre-allocating the entire image disk to a file. Ubuntu cloud images with the ``.img`` file type are QCOW

> images and are best used with the QEMU hypervisor.

Author: Good call. Updated with additional commit.

QEMU Shell
~~~~~~~~~~

When launching a system it is handy to know that ctrl-a c is an escape key that will take the user from the monitor or
serial console and to the QEMU monitor. From this shell a user can send keys to the guest via the sendkey option or even
close the guest via quit.

Seeding the Image
-----------------

Since we are dealing with cloud images here, we will need a cloud-init datasource to use. See the guide in this series

> called `use-local-ds`_ for steps required for setting up a seed image for a local cloud-init datasource.

Author: changed to a `:ref:`

.. _qcow-qemu:

> Launch QCOW Images Using QEMU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Launch QCOW images using QEMU
```

=============================

Ubuntu cloud images are released in many formats to enable many launch configurations and methods.

Among the many formats for cloud images is the ``.img`` QCOW format. This article will cover the QCOW use case and provide
instructions on how to use the images with QEMU.

For starting with an ISO server image, see the `server documentation`_ on downloading and converting an ISO for use
with QEMU.

QEMU and QCOWs
--------------

`QEMU`_ is a system emulator and "type 2" virtual machine hypervisor. Type 2 hypervisors run on top of the host operating
system. Often, QEMU is used with `KVM`_, which is a Type 1 hypervisor, which can run directly on bare metal. Together,
QEMU and KVM can enable running virtual machines at near-native speeds.

QCOW, which stands for "QEMU Copy On Write," is a format for images used by QEMU. QCOW image files grow according to use,
as opposed to pre-allocating the entire image disk to a file. Ubuntu cloud images with the ``.img`` file type are QCOW
images and are best used with the QEMU hypervisor.

QEMU Shell
~~~~~~~~~~

> When launching a system it is handy to know that ctrl-a c is an escape key that will take the user from the monitor or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When launching a system it is handy to know that ``ctrl-a`` (the default QEMU escape sequence) followed by ``c``, is an escape key that will take the user from the monitor or
```

> serial console and to the QEMU monitor. From this shell a user can send keys to the guest via the sendkey option or even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
serial console of the local machine to the QEMU monitor. From this QEMU shell a user can send keys to the guest via the sendkey option or even
```
Are these suggestions correct? If not, could you try to clarify a bit?

Author: I've attempted to clarify.

close the guest via quit.

> Seeding the Image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a seed image
```

-----------------

> Since we are dealing with cloud images here, we will need a cloud-init datasource to use. See the guide in this series

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we are dealing with cloud images here, we will need a cloud-init datasource to use. Refer to :ref:`use-local-cloud-init-ds`
```

> called `use-local-ds`_ for steps required for setting up a seed image for a local cloud-init datasource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 for steps needed to create a seed image for a local cloud-init datasource.
```

> Booting the Image with SeaBIOS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Option 1) Boot the image with SeaBIOS
```

------------------------------

> SeaBIOS booting an image is essentially the easiest as it is the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Booting an image with SeaBIOS is essentially the easiest option, as it is the default
```

firmware used by QEMU.

> The following launches a cloud image with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command launches a cloud image with:
```

* KVM acceleration
* the local machine's CPUs
* 2GB of memory

> * no graphics and serial output to the console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* no graphics, only serial output to the console
```

> * snapshot will make writes to a temporary file instead of the disk image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* snapshot  - this option will make writes to a temporary file instead of the disk image
```

>   itself. This ensures the base disk is not touched. If at some point, you want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  itself. This ensures that the base disk is not touched. If at some point, you want
```

>   to persist the changes you've made on the disk, press C-a s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to persist the changes you've made on the disk, press ``ctrl-a`` (the default QEMU escape sequence) followed by ``s``
```

> * virtio network device that redirect's guest port 22 to host's port 2222

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* virtio network device that redirect's guest (VM) port 22 to localhost's port 2222 
```

Author: imo this suggestion reduces clarity. `localhost` is just inaccurate here.

* virtio cloud image
* virtio seed image

.. code:: bash

    qemu-system-x86_64  \
      -cpu host -machine type=q35,accel=kvm -m 2048 \
      -nographic \
      -snapshot \
      -netdev id=net00,type=user,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22 \
      -device virtio-net-pci,netdev=net00 \
      -drive if=virtio,format=qcow2,file=ubuntu-20.04-server-cloudimg-amd64.img \
      -drive if=virtio,format=raw,file=seed.img

> Access to this VM can happen via the serial console or the user can open

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access this VM via the serial console or you can open
```

another terminal and ssh to the localhost's port 2222:

.. code:: bash

    ssh -o "StrictHostKeyChecking no" ubuntu@0.0.0.0 -p 2222

> Booting the Image with uEFI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Option 2) Boot the image with UEFI
```

---------------------------

> If a user wishes to not use BIOS, but instead uEFI then a different firmware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you wish to use UEFI instead of BIOS, then a different firmware
```

> is required. Ubuntu ships the ovmf package to provide uEFI firmware. Assuming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is required. Ubuntu ships the ``ovmf`` package to provide UEFI firmware. Assuming
```

> that package is installed, then a user can use a different flash image with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the package is installed, you can use a different flash image with
```

the -pflash option.

> The following is the same as the above, except the last line which specifies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command is the same as for the SeaBIOS option, except for the last line which specifies
```

the pflash option:

.. code::

    qemu-system-x86_64  \
      -cpu host -machine type=q35,accel=kvm -m 2048 \
      -nographic \
      -snapshot \
      -netdev id=net00,type=user,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22 \
      -device virtio-net-pci,netdev=net00 \
      -drive if=virtio,format=qcow2,file=ubuntu-20.04-server-cloudimg-amd64.img \
      -drive if=virtio,format=raw,file=seed.img \
      -drive if=pflash,format=raw,file=/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_CODE.fd,readonly

> A user can confirm that uEFI was used by checking for the existence of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can confirm that UEFI was used by checking for the existence of the
```

/sys/firmware/efi directory:

.. code::

    $ test -d /sys/firmware/efi && echo efi || echo bios
    efi

Additionally, the dmesg and efibootmgr commands will also have EFI related
output:

.. code::

    $ dmesg | grep EFI
    [    0.000000] efi: EFI v2.70 by EDK II
    [    0.505005] fb0: EFI VGA frame buffer device

>     [    0.569400] EFI Variables Facility v0.08 2004-May-17

Reviewer: Include a blank line below this one to improve readability.
